[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: In a time
of seeming disempowerment,
many people are turning
to spiritual practices
to regain a sense
of equilibrium.
Information streams
like Gaia are a source
of insight and inspiration.
And one of our favorite
authors, Mitch Horowitz,
is back with us today
to have a conversation
that I say the time
has arrived for,
to simply understand the
true metaphysical nature
of our beings.
This knowledge itself
can be the basis
of the creation of
our experienced world,
as opposed to all of
the rituals and beliefs
and really kind
of solid practices
we've done in the past.
That's the other part
of that open sentence.
Welcome back, Mitch.
>>MITCH HOROWITZ:
Thank you so much.
Great to be here.
>>REGINA: You know I
have been enjoying you
on a site called The Medium.
Medium.com.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
>>REGINA: Yeah
that's a great site
of kind of collated information
of all different subject
matters.
But I love the
content you're doing.
That's where people
can kind of connect
with all your newest articles.
And they're really wonderful
nice good sandwich sized piece.
It's not a little bite.
but it's not overwhelming.
It's not a giant hoagie.
They're really
beautifully written.
So I just want to
say, I'm loving it.
>>HOROWITZ: Oh I
appreciate that.
And I've been enjoying
writing for Medium
because it's direct to reader.
It's a streaming experience
and I love the immediacy
and I love connecting with
the many, many people who
are flowing through that site.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it's great.
And that's where I did
a lot of the research
for this particular interview.
Because I wanted to--
we've talked about
your books and you
have another one coming up.
But we're in this
unique period of time,
and you're writing
uniquely for this time.
>>HOROWITZ: Thank you.
That's my effort.
That's my wish.
I write about my search,
my search and my work
are one and the same.
>>REGINA: And one other
thing is with you,
you're always evolving yourself.
You don't claim to
be, I know everything.
I know all the principles.
I've studied them
all my whole life.
You're constantly evolving
your own knowledge base
and your own
understanding of how this
works to fit in a unique time.
>>HOROWITZ: I certainly
try and you're
one of the things I was
thinking about this morning is
that in all honesty, I
want to make mistakes.
I want to fail.
And I don't say that in some
glib way, or as a sentiment.
I experiment, I try,
I make an effort.
I pass these things
onto my readers.
I want to hear
from my readers how
they're doing with these
various exercises and methods
and techniques.
There's an old
expression, every guru
wishes that a student
will surpass him.
Well, I am not a guru.
I'm just a seeker.
But my wish is that if
a reader surpasses me
in something that I've
experimented with,
I'm on the right scent trail.
And if I stumble and if
I fail I want my reader
to know that as well.
>>REGINA: Yeah, OK.
So now we launch into some
of the new work, which
is one of the articles you
wrote is, "Is Magic Necessary"?
Now, like I said in the
open to this show people
are looking for magic.
They're looking for
kind of anything
to make this crazy
scene make sense now.
And right at this time you're
saying, do we really need that?
Launch into it.
>>HOROWITZ: That's a question
that I've been asking myself
really since early this year.
My spiritual search
is very broad ranging.
It includes meditation.
It includes positive
mind metaphysics.
It includes spells,
ceremonies, sigils, prayer,
every kind of practice
you can conceive of,
because I like to try
different vehicles.
And one of the things I
have asked myself recently
is whether at this point
in the human situation,
and given that all
of us are forced,
whether we want to
or not to participate
in this enormous reset, do we
need rote, ritual, liturgy,
ceremony?
Do we need the formality
of magical practice
or even some of our hallowed
religious traditions?
If the individual has a
sense that he or she leads
a metaphysical existence
along with the physical,
an extra physical existence
and we know far too much to
doubt that each one of us
participates in
both the physical
and extra physical
existence, is that knowledge
alone enough to see through
one's needs, wishes, desires,
obligations, and
ethics in the world?
Do we need the
formality of magic
or is the realization of
your extra physical existence
sufficient itself to bring
you into the larger life
that we're searching for
through liturgy and magic.
>>REGINA: True.
We're going to go into some kind
of famous statements about this
to put it in perspective.
But you and I were
talking off camera.
And there's one
thing, and that is
going to the event
or the emotion that
precedes the desire
to even participate
in all these rituals.
If you really take it back
to source and our being,
you and I were talking about the
word and the notion of desire.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes, and I
think desires are sacred.
I absolutely bow
my knee to desires.
If it wasn't for desire,
as we were talking about,
the Buddha never would have left
his palace to go on his search.
>>REGINA: Nothing would
occur in this universe.
>>HOROWITZ: Exactly.
And we talk about
or we're conditioned
to talk about
transcending desire.
But I really want people to
take a fresh look at that.
And we can afford to take a
fresh look at that in a world
that, whether we like it or not,
has been up ended right now.
Too often we as
seekers, and this
is true of people in every
walk of life, repeat ideas that
have been passed down to us,
very often in translations
of translations of translations
of ancient religious
and ethical
literature, very often
translations written
by people who are not
even able to converse
in the original language
that these things
were written in.
Very often translations
of literature
that, while it has
universal properties
also belong to a certain
time and place and set
of circumstances.
I think we can allow ourselves
the benefit right now
to look at concepts
like transcending desire
or non-attachment or
non-identification and ask,
is that really serving you in
your search as a 21st century
person?
Every religious idea is
culturally conditioned.
It may be universal
in some part.
But in another part, it's
attached to the time, place,
language, and social
situation from which it arose,
Judaism, Christianity, the
Vedic traditions, and so on.
There's no exception to that.
And you as the individual,
you as the individual,
have it as your
sacred birthright
to ask the question, how do
I know transcending desire is
a good idea?
How do I know that in terms
of my own verified personal
experience in the here and now?
Not what I've read,
not what's been
quoted to me, not what I can
cite chapter and verse of,
but in terms of my experience.
It may be that desire
is the precedent
that you the individual
need to get someplace
that's profoundly important.
>>REGINA: Well I believe that.
And that's, I think always
been part of my operating
system in life,
is without desire,
I'm not going to do anything.
I'm not going to
accomplish anything.
I have no motivation to do
anything, if there's no desire.
And so I mean, we
can either live life
at being pulled forward
or in resistance
or trying to repel life.
But I personally
believe that desire
is the thing that pulls
us forward into our lives
and into our dharma
and so forth.
And so, I agree with
you 100% we should
be asking that question
of ourselves, what
is the role of desire?
But then we have to, if
we're going to just go down
this rabbit hole
a little further,
I think it's important
to look at desire
with a big D versus a little d.
You know say, I think
I'm going to have
another couple of cocktails.
OK, that's a type
of desire, but I'm
talking about the desire
that kind of moves
between your cells, that you
can feel moving through you,
calling you.
That desire, that's a
different kind of desire.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes I agree.
I mean, the desire
with a small d
is escapism in a certain sense.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>HOROWITZ: It's intoxication.
It's calories.
It's booze.
It's I mean--
>>REGINA: Any kind of
addiction, binge watching.
>>HOROWITZ: Anything
that's compulsive.
Anything that's compulsive.
And what we're trying
to get at is not
escapism, but expression.
>>REGINA: Exactly, and
you put it perfectly.
Little d is escapism.
Big D is something that
draws you out and forward.
Big D, big desire.
>>HOROWITZ: And of course if
little d takes over my life.
I can't get anywhere.
>>REGINA: OK let's
talk about that
with the whole situation of
everybody being quarantined
all this time.
You're in the epicenter,
New York City.
Things got really quiet and
pretty still and for some
people, very depressing.
How did people deal
with the little d?
>>HOROWITZ: I'll tell
you this, you know,
and I say this somberly.
There was a lot of
drinking going on.
There was a lot of imbibing
of social media going on.
There was a lot of
binge watching going on,
not always a bad thing.
I mean, we all--
>>REGINA: I'll do binge
watching if it's fun.
I like it too.
>>HOROWITZ: We need to
unplug from time to time
and it's necessary.
I tend to binge watch
World War I documentaries,
which is not an ideal way
to unplug, but that's me.
But I think that people were
and are dealing with depression.
And New York is just
starting to come out of it.
But we're dealing with
the aftermath of it.
And it's very, very tough.
And this is one
of the reasons why
I want people to ask themselves
very serious questions
as if for the first time,
as if for the first time.
>>REGINA: This is
the time to do it.
>>HOROWITZ: What do I want?
What do I want?
>>REGINA: Like you said at the
beginning, this is a reset.
This is a chance to reset
society, cultures, everything.
>>HOROWITZ: , Everything and
none of us particularly asked
for it, at least not
in a cognizant way.
But we received it.
We received it.
We have to ask ourselves
about college expenses.
We have to ask ourselves about
the scale of our household.
>>REGINA: Well let's
have the courage
to go there for a minute.
>>HOROWITZ: Please.
>>REGINA: So many kids are
just dying on the vine.
This whole virtual school,
doing everything online
has just killed their
enthusiasm, interest, energy.
You know, so kids are
gaming late at night.
They don't even want to get up
and do these stupid classes.
And so this is bringing a
whole larger discussion up as
to the nature of
an education model
that was based in
the Industrial Age
to train people for specific
things, specific jobs,
to walk through a
specific door, to apply
for a specific thing,
most of which or much
of which is going away.
>>HOROWITZ: No
question about that.
It's extremely important and
I really ask parents and kids
and caregivers to think
very, very carefully
about the cost-benefit
ratio of college,
about whether college
is going to steer you
on a path that's financially
stable, and personally happy,
personally rewarding.
Because I think I mean
certainly my generation
has operated for a long
time off of the model
that, well, if you
have a college degree
you can pull yourself up by
the bootstraps and so on and so
forth.
>>REGINA: Not so much now.
>>HOROWITZ: Not so much now.
That's a post-war
baby boomer trope.
It's a trope.
>>REGINA: It's a trope
and we have to look at it.
And I was saying to
you before the show,
I always tell my kids you can be
an electrician who loves opera.
No one will ever be
able to export your job.
You're doing work that's
extremely important
and you're getting paid well.
And if you want to immerse
yourself in all the things
that are beautiful
and good in life,
you can do that in the trades.
The trades are a
wonderful career.
And I think we
really have to start
to wrap our arms around that.
I so agree with you.
I was just-- it just made me--
I was tickled to hear
you say it in that way.
I couldn't agree with
you more on this.
And this allows the
freedom of a young person
to actually start
resonating with something
rather than trying to fill
some industrialized slot
in the world.
>>HOROWITZ: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: I mean, like
you say with your son,
there's a Matthew, Matthew
Crawford wrote a book called,
"Shop Class as Soul Craft."
Which I thought was--
I read that a few years ago.
I thought it was an
amazing book, looking at--
here is a man who
was in a think tank,
and really using his mind
strategically, very, very
mental process.
You never see an outcome of
anything at the end of the day.
You're just playing with ideas.
You go home and it's like
nothing has really happened.
His days seemed inconsequential.
So he decided the heck with it.
And he decided to go back
into something he adored,
which was motorcycle
maintenance.
And he took over a garage
and start repairing
the town's motorcycles.
And so people come in with their
stories, friendships are made.
Complex little
problems are solved
and you start feeling like
he had a life, a community.
Riff on that for a minute.
>>HOROWITZ: It's
absolutely fascinating.
And I remember back when
I was in publishing,
oh man, this must be
going back about 20 years.
I was at Penguin which is
now Penguin Random House.
And I was sitting in
an editorial meeting
and I received a
proposal for a book.
It wasn't "Shop
Craft as Soul Craft."
But it even preceded
that book, in which
the author was making the
case that it was really time
to rethink college.
And I loved the book.
And my colleagues
stared at me blankly.
They just didn't get
it because they all
grew up with the
presumption that this
is the pathway to
the middle class.
And now what we're
seeing is, it's
in many cases, not all but many
a pathway to crushing debt.
>>REGINA: Crushing the spirit.
>>HOROWITZ: Crushing the
spirit to great difficulty,
to getting to hemmed into
choices you might not want.
And of course, none
of this stuff is easy.
None of this stuff is easy.
If an individual unplugged
a white collar job
and goes into a more
craft based job,
he or she might have terrible
concerns about health care.
How do you pay for That these
are deadly serious issues.
And I'm with the
individual on these issues.
There's no hiding
from any of this.
>>REGINA: It's not easy.
>>HOROWITZ: It's not easy
and it's very complex.
But we have to look at it.
I mean we're being
forced to look at it.
And it has to be treated--
we have to throw ourselves
into it with a certain degree
of energy.
Because whether
we like it or not,
these questions
are in front of us.
I know somebody who got
laid off from a finance job
back in the Great
Recession of 2008.
He had carpentry skills.
He became a carpenter.
He was enormously happy.
I'm not saying it's
the path for everybody,
but I've seen too many such
instances to just dismiss it
as a chimera.
I mean, these are real things.
>>REGINA: They are,
and a lot of it
has to do with us parents
to start actually just
observing and watching where
our children's excitement is
coming from.
Because a lot of times we're
walking right past them.
We've got them shipped off
into this class and a tutor
here and music lessons
there and so forth.
And we're not really
watching what's
giving rise to increases
in their own excitement
and energy.
And I was interviewing
Michael Tellinger years
ago in his Ubuntu
Movement and talking
about mentorship
programs, where children
start showing their passions
and skills early in life.
And even at the age
of seven and eight,
pairing them with someone
who is skilled in that field.
>>HOROWITZ: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: You know there's so
many creative ways to do this.
And it just makes me so happy
even having this conversation.
Because it's like human beings
get to buy their souls back.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes,
that's the wish.
That's the wish.
You know, I think
we're all going
to need to come to
terms with not only what
do we really want, but how--
this economy is never
going to go back
to the way it was
six months ago.
And none of us
know precisely what
that is going to look like.
>>REGINA: It will be different.
>>HOROWITZ: It'll be different.
And of course,
there's going to be
a need for medical
professionals and for engineers.
But there's also going to be
need for all kinds of jobs that
can't be outsourced,
whether it's
auto mechanic or
hairstylist or you name it.
And I think certainly, in
this past generation or two,
we have as a society,
made a terrible mistake
of failing to attach appropriate
prestige to those jobs.
>>REGINA: Yes, we have.
>>HOROWITZ: Those
are wonderful jobs.
>>REGINA: Calling
them blue collar.
>>HOROWITZ: Yeah, I
don't like any of that.
>>REGINA: And
elevating white collar.
>>HOROWITZ: Amen.
I don't like any of that.
>>REGINA: Right down to the
criminal justice system.
You can get away
with horrific crimes
if you have a white
collar, if you
have a whiter, whitest collar.
>>HOROWITZ: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: It's pretty
sickening when you look back.
>>HOROWITZ: A jet plane crashes
with 180 people on board,
there will never be any
criminal prosecutions.
>>REGINA: That's correct, yeah.
Well, we're on the same page
in virtually everything anyway
here.
So let's go back to
the notion of magic.
So we hear people thinking,
OK, I know what I want now.
How do I manifest this?
And you kind of look to your
book of magic or miracles
and you span all of them.
You use everything.
And so I'm just going to
read a couple of things
here, because this
is interesting.
The word magic itself
has a connotation.
Some people are afraid of it.
Some want to dive into it.
Yeah, and because of the notion
of black and white magic.
OK.
So, and basically,
Aleister Crowley,
whose work you've also studied,
whom many people shudder
at the name of, right?
He's saying, simply
put the science and art
of causing change to occur
in conformity with will, that
is what he's calling magic.
I pulled that out of one, I
believe one of your articles.
The art and science of causing
change to occur in conformity
with our will.
Or I would say, desire.
OK, will or desire.
Singer wrote, and
you can tell us
who Singer is, we're all
black magicians in our dreams
and our fantasies,
perversions, and phobias.
So everyone has a little
bit of black magic.
If you're thinking
clearly an unkind thought,
and hermetics go
deeply into this,
if you're thinking an unkind
thought about this person
over there that is putting
out a thread of energy,
a thought form in the world.
That's black magic.
>>HOROWITZ: Well,
it's interesting.
And I have to say, I felt a
sense of great liberation,
personally speaking
in my search,
when I began pushing
away the idea of being
afraid of black
magic and turning
from black magic,
of averting my eyes
from so-called black magic.
And today, I think
we're in an era that's
beyond white and black magic.
I don't think that concept
serves us well anymore.
But to use the
old terms, I would
say if somebody asked
me for a definition of,
what do you mean when
you say black magic?
I mean very simply it's
my will be done versus thy
will be done.
We read in scripture,
thy will be done
and we write to merger will with
a higher will of the creator
or god.
I would have to say to be
plain, traditionally speaking,
black magic is my will be done.
However, I bring a
different wrinkle to it.
You mentioned the name Aleister
Crowley, and lots of people
cringe when they hear Crowley.
Crowley was a brilliant
magician, a brilliant artist,
a brilliant intellect.
Crowley, in my estimation
had a terrible ethical lapse.
And if he was living, I
wouldn't be one of his students.
Crowley, I think
was insufficiently--
>>REGINA: Principled?
>>HOROWITZ: --versed
or principled
in the idea of reciprocity.
Reciprocity, all of
life is one whole.
>>REGINA: Will over others.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes,
will over others.
>>REGINA: That's what I consider
black magic, will over others.
>>HOROWITZ: It's an
interesting question.
I sit with that question.
I do believe in
cosmic reciprocity.
Another person
might call it karma.
I do believe that
whatever I do to another,
I'm ultimately doing to myself.
And there's no question
about that in my mind.
>>REGINA: Well, you have a
very high sense of ethics
and a very broad background
in the use of mind.
>>HOROWITZ: I appreciate that.
So I really take very seriously
that whatever I'm doing
I'm ultimately doing to self.
I can't function without
an ethical backdrop.
Crowley did not have an ethical
backdrop and people around him
got hurt.
You could learn from
Crowley but you must,
must see the terrible
lapses in his character.
>>REGINA: But it's
not just Crowley.
I mean, I've interviewed
many, many, many people.
And some of them I know
the personal side of.
They're not walking their talk.
We can just say that.
>>HOROWITZ: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: A lot of people are
brilliant in terms of content.
But they're not necessarily--
and what is the saying?
We teach best what
we need to learn.
And so a lot of
people I interview,
actually, well, a number of
them fall in that category.
>>HOROWITZ: It's
the truth and we get
to see the sausages being made.
You know, when you know the
person behind the workshop,
you get to see the
sausages being made.
And it ain't always pretty.
>>REGINA: No, it's not.
And it's surprising, some
of the people actually
that pose as the
greatest light are often
the ones that are doing harm.
And some of the
people that seem--
I remember interviewing-- I'm
not going to name his name.
I think we have him
in our archives here.
But when he came
into the studio,
everyone was like, oh my god.
You know it was like
darkness is coming our way.
This was one of the
sweetest hearts and kindest
men, gentleman like
in the heart, even.
And yet some of the
principles also aligned
with the intellectual
principles of Crowley.
So we ourselves need
to go out of fear
and have our own discernment.
Like, no, you crossed
the line there.
I don't believe that.
That's black magic to me.
May not be to someone else.
>>HOROWITZ: I know who
you mean and I also
won't mention his name.
But I personally like him
because I know in his heart
he's an ethical person.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOROWITZ: And I want people
to feel that their search has
no boundaries.
And I also want to
start to throw out
some of our vocabulary.
Because we hem people
into thinking like that's
a good person.
That's a bad person.
Whereas the actual
story of a person's life
can be very complex and can
have to do with what barriers
they're dealing with, what
they're pushing against,
who they are, their
sense of reciprocity.
And those who
advertise themselves
as being the whitest magic,
I mean, we've both seen it.
You part the curtain and there's
anger, there's desperation,
there's outburst, there's
humiliating other people.
And it can make you cynical.
But I would say,
don't be cynical.
Don't be cynical.
>>REGINA: I agree with you.
In fact, there are always tells.
When you're listening
to a person and you're
in a person's field.
How is this making me feel?
You know, they're speaking
sparkly, nice words,
but wow, my heart hurts.
My guts hurt.
I want to run.
Pay attention because you're
getting conflicting information
that's in a subtle field.
And I mean, this is
really hard because we
have to know started detaching
our intellect from everything
we've been told is true into
a level of true discernment,
which gets us back
to the original part
of the conversation.
When you keep reducing,
reducing, reducing,
we go to desire.
Crowley calls it will.
And desire fueled by will
is a very, very powerful.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes, yes.
I would say desire
fueled by will is,
it's the primeval form of magic.
It's the deepest
part of ourselves.
You know I would suspect
that all of your viewers
probably can identify
a period of time
in life where they said
to themselves, maybe
when they were very young,
maybe when they were older,
I know exactly what I want.
I know exactly what
I have to go for.
And I would always ask people
to hold onto that recollection.
Think about what the
circumstances were
when you experienced it and ask
yourself, can I cultivate this?
Because there's magic in that.
And I've experienced
it myself and recently.
You can't always cultivate it.
It can't always
be grasped again.
But sometimes it can.
And I know I had an experience
myself about 20 years ago,
where I walked to the
top of a stone tower that
was on the banks of the Charles
River in Westin, Massachusetts.
I wasn't supposed to be
inside this stone tower.
It was covered with
grating and stuff.
But I had to go inside.
And I got to the
top of this tower
and I looked out over the
Charles, and I said to myself,
I want to be a writer.
I want to be an
established author.
And something went out of me.
And it was the most
magical moment of my life.
I know people listening
have had those experiences.
Watch for those.
>>REGINA: I agree.
And in fact, I do conferences,
sometimes, very rarely,
where I'll take a
small group of people
and I'll take them into my home
for two, three days together.
And I do this one
particular meditation
that brings back the
magic of what you
desired at five, six years old.
>>HOROWITZ: Brilliant,
>>REGINA: Brilliant.
Because we're much closer
at that age to the desires
we came in with, even if it's
not literally the feeling
that fueled that
desire at that age
and reconnecting with
that particular feeling
may or may not be
associated with that thing
that they love
doing at that time.
But it's going back and tracing
when what moments in my life
have I felt that feeling.
That's the feeling of passion.
>>HOROWITZ: That's wonderful.
You know, this is something I
talk about in one of my books.
The philosopher
Goethe had a principle
that what you wish for when
you're very, very young
will come upon you in
waves when you're old.
So be careful.
And a lot of people hear that
and they want to argue with it
and say, well, wait a minute.
There's lots of things I
wish for I haven't got.
And I would always say,
take some time with that.
Peel back the onion.
Because you may find
an uncanny congruity
between your fantasies when you
were even as young as age three
or four and what you're
living out right now.
We're very forgetful.
And with intervals of time we
fail to make connections, just
human nature.
But if you really allow the
onion to be peeled back,
you might find an extraordinary
symmetry between the earliest
fantasies and present life.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
I mean, in my life has
been quite literal.
I mean, my earliest
fantasies were all artistic,
but especially dancing.
You know going borrowing
someone's coffee table
book at five to teach myself
ballet, because no one would
give me lessons.
But then again, picking
up ballet as an adult,
I was taking ballet
again right before COVID.
You know, tango
dancing, tap dancing,
you know, something about
having communication
moved through the body,
because I wasn't very I wasn't
very open and communicative.
I couldn't speak with my
mouth, but my body could speak.
And so I find that that's
facilitated all kinds
of communication sense.
And even being a journalist
and a film producer, when
I was very young,
I thought, god,
could a woman direct a film?
And 20, 30 years later I'm on
a mountaintop with my crew.
It's like oh my god, I had
this fantasy as a girl.
Tell me some of those for
you and some other people
because this is exciting when we
start, because people watching
right now are, oh
my god, I remember
what I was excited about.
>>HOROWITZ: I'll
share it very frankly.
When I was a kid just
from the youngest age,
like let's say age
four, I vividly
remember that when
we were playing--
I was playing some kind
of game with my friends,
whether it was an army game
or cowboys or whatever it was,
I was internally
imagining that I
was playing the part of a cowboy
or playing the part of an army
guy in a movie, in a TV show and
that there was a camera on me.
Now, I didn't disclose
this to my friends.
And they were surely having
their own experiences.
But that was part of my
earliest stock of memories.
And I look at my life
today, and very often I
am in front of cameras and
I am in front of audiences.
I am in front of microphones.
It didn't come about
in exactly the way
that I could have imagined.
But it came about.
And it did so decisively.
And I really want people
to turn their minds back
to those earliest fantasies.
There is so much information
there about who we are
and who we must be.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
And so, I encourage
everybody right now just,
even if you have to hit
pause, go back and think
about it before we even go
on with this conversation.
OK.
We have a lot of
places we can go here.
But one of them is, you've
been in Egypt recently.
And I was going to
use a segue to that,
that the whole notion of
this black and white, light
and dark, you know, white
magic, black magic, that
dates back thousands
and thousands of years,
these principles.
And one of the things that
you were talking about
was the notion that you
have set and Horus embracing
one another in this statuary.
Talk about that.
And then we'll get into Egypt,
the culture, and everything.
>>HOROWITZ: Horus is seen as
sort of the Redeemer figure
in ancient Egyptian culture.
Set is seen sometimes as
the adversarial figure,
the satanic figure.
And one of the old
kingdom pharaohs
was trying to unite
Upper and Lower Egypt,
and he instructed his artists to
depict images of Set and Horus
embracing one another.
And I was just overwhelmed
when I saw these base reliefs.
Because we don't
see that very often.
>>REGINA: I have not that.
That's why it really caught me.
>>HOROWITZ: They're rare.
And I thought, there's
the whole human situation.
>>REGINA: What dynasty
was that, which pharaoh?
>>HOROWITZ: It was one of
the old kingdom dynasties
but I don't recall the pharaoh.
And it's in the Egyptian
National Museum.
It's somewhere off
in the basement.
You know, it's not
very widely seen.
>>REGINA: In Cairo?
>>HOROWITZ: In Cairo.
But it's absolute magnificent.
I have some images
which I can post online
for people, which I will do.
And it's the whole
human situation.
We have to embrace these
different sides of us,
because they're all us.
They're all us.
That doesn't mean throwing
reciprocity out the window.
But we can't be divorced
from these different sides
to ourselves.
Somewhere along the
line, the human story
got broken down into a white
magic, black magic dichotomy.
And we're afraid of the
fact that we're both.
We're both.
>>REGINA: And that's what I like
so much about the story you're
telling about yourself.
You can appreciate what Aleister
Crowley brought to the front
in terms of the way in which
humans can use their desire
and their will for outcome.
At the same time, you're not
going to follow his ethics.
You're going to apply it with
a very highly developed sense
of ethics.
And yet, right
now in this world,
I've never seen
more polarization.
>>HOROWITZ: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: If you can
make a person wrong,
you're going to make you wrong.
And there's a deep need to have
I don't even understand fully,
this need for such
re-entrenched identity,
that everything outside
of that is simply wrong.
What you're asking for, what
we're talking about here
is literally to throw that away.
>>HOROWITZ: That's my wish.
>>REGINA: How does
that happen in such
an incredibly polarized world?
>>HOROWITZ: It's
interesting you know,
obviously some of the
problems we're facing
have to do with social media.
Human nature hasn't changed.
>>REGINA: Media
and social media.
>>HOROWITZ: Media
There's something about the
anonymity of social media
that I don't like.
>>REGINA: It brings
up a meanness.
>>HOROWITZ: It does.
It brings up a
meanness and there's
a disinhibition of the wrong
kind that encourages people,
sometimes anonymously,
sometimes not, to make
a withering and nasty and
sarcastic comment at will,
24/7, always and everywhere.
And it's really problematic
because it's not
accompanied by bravery.
>>REGINA: No.
>>HOROWITZ: There isn't
a commensurate bravery.
If you're going to get
up in somebody's face,
that may or may
not be a good idea.
But if you're going to do
it, at least bear witness.
At least be who
you actually are.
But when you're hiding
behind an anonymous handle
or when you're functioning at a
social remove or the perception
of social remove, it's
kind of like everybody's
going all guns blazing
with no consequence.
But there are
consequences, which
is we've degraded one another.
And we've made sarcasm, which
has its uses, into the language
of everyday life.
I always tell
people, if you want
to stand more tall, if you
feel like you're suffering
from a poor self-image, give
yourself one hour in which you
desist from gossip,
humiliating other people,
or withering sarcasm, and see
if you don't stand more tall.
You will.
These things degrade us.
And people don't see it.
>>REGINA: They don't and we
don't know how subtle it is
and how serious it
is in our own lives.
>>HOROWITZ: Right.
Right.
It all--
>>REGINA: Making even a little
dig like, oh, god, them again?
>>HOROWITZ: Exactly.
It does come back
to the individual.
I think there's a
faculty within us that's
sometimes called auto
suggestion, that we
are what we think.
OK.
Auto suggestion, let's say, or
conditioning shape self-image.
We also are shaped by what
we're always saying and thinking
about other people.
We don't get a pass.
That auto suggest is a function
that reverberates back to us.
And I would venture
that other people
have had this experience.
If you go to lunch with somebody
who draws you into gossiping
and you spend 90 minutes
gossiping, just talking down
other people for
cheap thrills, you
will feel almost physically
sick after that lunch.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>HOROWITZ: I've had that
experience, Listen to that.
That's valuable information.
Imagine what's going on 24/7.
But it can be unplugged from.
It is possible.
>>REGINA: And there's
also a fine line
between sharing kind of
critical, uncomfortable
information and gossip.
So how do you even
make that discernment
because people need to know in
their bodies, how to discern.
>>HOROWITZ: Sure, listen, people
have to call out injustice
sometimes.
People have to air
problems sometimes.
We're going to have friction.
That's part of the
human situation.
And if you talk it
over with a friend,
you're going to be
representing your side
and they'll be representing
the other side.
I'm not saying that there's
not a place for that in life.
Of course there is.
But it's talking
down people in kind
of a wise ass kind of way--
>>REGINA: That makes you
feel somehow superior.
>>HOROWITZ: Superior, exactly.
Taking pleasure at
other people's pain
or suffering, taking
an attitude that--
almost it's entertainment.
You know, it's smear
as entertainment.
And we know when we
cross over into that.
We know when we cross over
to smear as entertainment.
>>REGINA: We do and
another area that
dovetails in with that is
assigning motives to a person
and what they're doing and why.
We can say, I really don't
like what you're doing.
I think what you're
doing is wrong.
But you're saying, you're
just doing this because.
Now this is a whole other
layer that we tend to do.
We want to assign
motive because it's
where our mind would assign
the motive, where we might jump
into that exact behavior
or we're familiar with
or we've experienced.
Talk a little bit about that.
>>HOROWITZ: It's a trust issue.
You know, we see people taking
a position on, let's say,
a certain political issue.
And we immediately
think, aha, you're
taking that position
because you're this
or because you're that.
And it's not always true.
>>REGINA: Right.
You don't always know
someone's motive.
>>HOROWITZ: You don't
know their motive.
>>REGINA: Sometimes
you're totally wrong.
>>HOROWITZ: And it's also
important, I believe,
on the other end, to be
very, very plain with people,
to say what you believe.
Another thing that I think
we have gotten into overusing
on social media are
rhetorical questions,
where we're not really
asking a question.
A question is a sacred thing.
The question is at the
heart of the human exchange.
And if we turn questions
into just a device--
>>REGINA: To prove
yourself right.
>>HOROWITZ: We
reduce our ability
to even have an exchange
with one another.
Don't ask a question
frivolously.
in a rhetorical way.
It really is a profound misuse
of the language, of the psyche,
it makes it impossible
for us to communicate.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
We have gone far afield
and I'm so glad we have.
But now we're going to go
back to the notion of now
we're talking about
deconstructing
some of these bad habits.
We're actually
talking about the fact
that maybe we can leave
the Ouija board behind.
>>HOROWITZ: Yeah, that's
very interesting actually,
the old Ouija board.
I believe there's a lot
that we can leave behind.
You know, I think that
if we accept that we have
an extra physical existence.
And I think in addition to the
testimony of seekers, which
extends back centuries,
we are seeing so much
in the sciences
today, whether it's
psychical research, or quantum
theorizing, or neuroplasticity,
or advances in placebo studies,
we've seen so much to conclude
at this point in
the 21st century
that materialism
simply no longer covers
the bases of life.
Philosophical materialism,
the belief that matter just
creates itself, it
simply doesn't work.
It doesn't work it may
continue to hold sway
in academia and other
places, but it no longer
covers the bases.
So if we can all
come to the agreement
that we do have some kind of
an extra physical existence,
it stands to reason that emotive
thoughts, mental pictures,
a focused will, a sense of
reciprocity, these things
are in themselves
sufficient to enact what
Aleister Crowley, for
example, was seeking
through magic and ritual.
>>REGINA: Here, here.
OK so now we're going
to talk about a couple
of really interesting
things I read
about through one
of your articles
having to do with
the placebo effect.
And this one was
really wonderful.
It was talking about
a placebo where
the people in the
study actually we're
told they're being
given the sugar pill.
I mean that's normally
not the way it goes.
You get the drug,
the sugar pill.
They were told they were
being given a sugar pill.
>>HOROWITZ: That's right.
>>REGINA: Take it from here.
>>HOROWITZ: There this is
the so-called honest placebo
study that was conducted several
years ago at Harvard Medical
School.
Harvard took a group of
subjects who were suffering
from irritable bowel syndrome.
One group of subjects
was given nothing.
They were just a control group.
Another group of subjects was
given effectively a sugar pill.
And this group of subjects was
told transparently and upfront,
this is a sugar pill.
You are receiving an
inert, inactive substance.
59% of those subjects reported
significant and lasting relief.
It was absolutely extraordinary.
And my hat is really off
to these researchers,
because not only did they
structure a very innovative
experiment, but they held
back from judging the results.
They said, look, we found
something extraordinary.
The placebo effect
works transparently.
It works.
Now what do we do with it?
Why?
Isn't that a wonderful Question
everybody wants to jump to why,
why?
You know, I-- let me say
of course I'm not sure.
I've thought about
it quite a bit.
>>REGINA: I've
thought about it too.
I mean we can understand how
a positive image, feeling,
and desire works.
But to know this thing
doesn't necessarily
represent that, and to still get
the good will of that desire.
>>HOROWITZ: It's amazing.
It's like the individual him
or herself, I would venture,
I would venture, that most
people in our culture today,
most people if you
say to them, you
know what the placebo effect
is, would say, well, of course.
Do you believe in
the effectiveness
of the placebo effect?
They would say, of course, sure.
I have read this
and that article.
The very knowledge that the mind
can materially affect the body
is in itself sufficient.
And if people can be reasonably
encouraged in that direction
and told the truth as this study
tells them, here's the truth.
You can actually do this.
Think of the possibilities
that presents to us.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>HOROWITZ: It's amazing.
>>REGINA: Back to pure mind,
pure desire, pure will.
And now there was
another study, it
had to do with
maids, hotel maids.
>>HOROWITZ: The hotel maids.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about it.
>>HOROWITZ: Absolutely
mind blowing.
People are going to
think I'm making this up
and I encourage
them to go online,
put in the search terms,
find the scientific journals
that this was written about in.
And call me out if I'm
exaggerating any of it.
Call me out.
There was a
psychologist at Harvard
named Ellen Langer who did
a study several years ago
with a group of hotel maids.
She divided the subjects,
as in most of these studies,
into a control group, who
just went about their business
as normal, and
then a study group.
Langer and her colleagues
told the study group
the truth, which is
that the work they're
doing every day
as hotel maids has
aerobic and anaerobic benefit,
and did they know that?
Most of the maids said,
well no, I didn't know that.
And Langer and her
colleagues said, well, yeah.
Check this out.
You're pushing around
vacuums all day long.
You're changing linen.
You're moving around.
You're on your hands and knees.
You're pushing a cart.
These things have aerobic
and anaerobic benefit.
Six weeks in, the control
group showed no change.
The study group
showed weight loss,
lowered blood pressure, greater
flexibility, and greater muscle
to fat ratio.
They had done nothing different.
Langer and her team was
monitoring their activities.
There was no difference
in their activities.
Just knowing the truth,
which is that their jobs had
aerobic and anaerobic benefit,
made a concrete difference
in their health,
measurable, measurable,
even to the extent
of weight loss,
muscle tone, lowered
hypertension.
It's just incredible.
These people were
told the truth.
>>REGINA: And it
wasn't that they
had to go into a
deep belief system.
It was just an understanding.
Oh, OK, sure.
That's right.
>>HOROWITZ: Just an acceptance.
They monitored their
activities carefully.
There was no change
in their activities.
But knowledge itself,
accurate knowledge
of what they were doing.
I mean, listen the phrase has
to be used, mind over matter.
Mind over matter.
That's not an exaggeration.
No one challenges this data.
They might challenge the
implications of the data.
But those are the implications.
And there's many other things in
neuroplasticity, where thoughts
change the neural
pathways through which
electrical impulses travel.
The designer of neuroplasticity,
a psychologist at UCLA,
Jeffrey Schwartz,
he's brave enough
to say, yes, this is
actually mind over matter.
This is mind over matter.
We're seeing this
in our generation.
So to say that we lead an extra
physical existence, that's
not a far out statement.
>>REGINA: It is not.
And that to me was--
the statement, the one
statement you made alone,
i to simply under--
if humanity simply understood
that they are extra
dimensional.
They have an extra dimensional,
metaphysical component.
This is just part of it.
Just to even know that and
accept it, as you said,
actually created the outcome
from the first experiment.
>>HOROWITZ: And it's amazing,
what we're talking about
is very elementary,
mainstream stuff.
I'm not even going into
psychical research.
I'm not going into
quantum theorizing.
any of that stuff that
gets more controversial.
No one questions this
data and there it is.
>>REGINA: OK.
We have another little area
I'd like to dabble into
and then I want to find out
what you were doing in Egypt
and then I want to talk
about your new book.
So we're going to have to
hop through these things.
Anarchic magic.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes.
That's basically ripping it
all up, ripping it all up,
throwing out the
various rule books,
various liturgies,
throwing out the symbols,
rites, and ceremonies,
and designing it for yourself.
>>REGINA: This was big
for you because you
have symbols on your body.
>>HOROWITZ: Yes, I do. , Well
I love the symbols that I have
on my body.
They remind me of things in life
that I care very deeply about
or memories or periods
of time or people
that I care very deeply about.
>>REGINA: But I think
you said in one article,
you have a sigil.
>>MITCH HOROWITZ: Yes I do.
I have a sigil on
the back of my neck.
I don't know what it
means because I really
trust the sorceress
who made it for me.
And I said, I'm going
to let you do this.
It's someone in Mexico City.
She sent it to me.
Talk about trust.
So I got it tattooed
on the back of my neck.
I really believe in going
all the way, you know.
>>REGINA: You're all in.
>>HOROWITZ: So, yeah.
I'm all in.
That's my choice.
>>REGINA: So anarchic
magic means throw it away.
>>HOROWITZ: Throw
it away, including
the term anarchic magic.
You know, that's my term.
Doesn't have to
be my neighbor's.
Do whatever you like.
But I want people to
feel that liberty.
>>REGINA: So that was the
idea of this conversation.
We're in a post magic world.
Go to the source.
Go to your desire.
Go to the understanding you
are a supernatural being,
just by being here.
>>HOROWITZ: I
believed every word
of that, every word of that.
>>REGINA: Now let's go to Egypt,
and the documentary you're
doing.
It looks beautiful.
>>HOROWITZ: Oh.
Thank you.
>>REGINA: I've just seen
that little trailer.
So talk about that.
What are you doing there?
>>HOROWITZ: Last year,
filmmaker Ronnie Thomas and I
traveled to Egypt, where we
are shooting a documentary
on the book, "The
Kybalion" which
a very wonderful, magical
book it was published in 1908.
Which is basically a modern
adaptation of Hermetica.
>>REGINA: Of Hermetica, yeah.
>>HOROWITZ: So it's the
psychology of the Hermetica.
>>REGINA: Right,
which would of course,
have to take you to the
mother country, Egypt.
>>HOROWITZ: That was our wish.
That was our wish.
We said, look, we
don't just want
to sit in front
of a green screen.
We really, really want
to go to the source.
And so we went to Egypt and we
shot there for about two weeks.
It was an amazing
experience because we
got to go places that I never
thought I would get to go.
It was also a very
chaotic experience.
And I love the nation of Egypt
and I love the Egyptian people.
It is a tough country
to navigate around in.
And we had to do a lot to get
places and to get cooperation,
but we did get cooperation.
>>REGINA: Did you go to the
main places, like Luxor--
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, yeah,
we went to the--
>>REGINA: --and Ramana.
>>HOROWITZ: Yeah.
We went to the main places,
including the Great Pyramids
and so forth.
But we got to go to
some places deep, deep
underneath The Valley of Kings.
We got to go to some
very out of the way
places in the Temple of
Karnak, the Karnak complex.
And I had some
opportunities to lay hands
on antiquities,
which is something
that I approach very carefully.
Because if everybody that comes
along lays hands on something,
it's going to be ruinous.
And I thought this
through very carefully.
But I was given the permission
to do it and I did do it.
And it was just a physically
tactile, real experience.
And we talk about, one
of the experiences I had
was laying hands on a beautiful
magnificent ceremonial bowl.
And I just felt absolute
lightning course
through my body.
There's no other
way I can put it.
And you begin to
get a sense of some
of what the ancient ancestors
might have experienced.
>>REGINA: And so much
of their iconography
had to do really with
the movement of the stars
and the solar system.
As above, so below.
>>HOROWITZ: As above, so below,
the great Hermetic dictum.
And if a person can live
with that statement,
it sounds so simple.
As above, so below.
And yet live with it and
begin to apply it to life,
and you'll see it begins
to unmask so much to you.
There's a great power in that.
>>REGINA: It really does.
I mean as soon as you said you
laid your hands on the bowl,
I'm thinking the Age of Taurus.
What was happening at that
time and inbued in that.
>>HOROWITZ: There's so much--
you know the ancients had such
a profoundly deep understanding
of nature.
They were so connected to
nature in ways that I am not,
I don't think we've
even begun to grapple
with what their experience was.
>>REGINA: So when
do we see this?
>>HOROWITZ: Oh,
well, you know we
got held up because of the
COVID epidemic and other things.
We are supposed to be doing
the final filming this summer.
So knock wood, you're going to
see it probably-- thank you,
I'm guessing in
late fall of 2020.
We thought it would
be out sooner,
but the world
turned upside down.
>>REGINA: 2021.
>>HOROWITZ: No, no, 2020.
>>REGINA: This year?
>>HOROWITZ: 2020 is possible.
We might see it.
We might see it in
November, December.
>>REGINA: Wonderful.
>>HOROWITZ: You know
that's optimistic,
but we're doing our
final shoots this summer.
That much I can say.
>>REGINA: I'm so excited
because just having a peek,
it looks like you're
doing a beautiful job.
The fact that you
ferreted out Set and Horus
embracing each other,
I've not seen that before.
When I go to the
Egyptian exhibit sites,
certainly in Paris, obviously
and New York, Paris,
and London, any opportunity.
But then of course,
the Egyptian government
called back a lot of the
antiquities and I miss them.
Because I haven't gone
to the exhibit in Cairo.
>>HOROWITZ: Well here's
one thing that's funny.
In Egypt, when the
tour guides or whomever
wants to sort of put a
label on you, at some point
the conversation they'll
say, oh, you're a meditator.
That's how they'll label
an occultist or a New Ager
or what have you.
And yes, I'm a meditator.
And then they understand
what you're about.
So that's their lingo.
>>REGINA: Yeah, absolutely.
Well, I can't wait
to go there one day.
OK, now let's get
to your newest book.
>>HOROWITZ: Oh, my newest book
is called "The Miracle Habits."
And that is out July 14,
and in "The Miracle Habits,"
I very simply identify 13
habits, 13 daily actions,
that you can go
through life with.
And I think they can
help you really and truly
demonstrate and exercise your
own ethical power in the world.
That's what the book is about.
>>REGINA: So it's
about ethical power.
>>HOROWITZ: Ethical power,
and when I say ethical--
>>REGINA: Ethics are
really needed right now.
>>HOROWITZ: Very much.
I simply mean reciprocity.
>>REGINA: And explain
that for people
so they understand
your definition.
>>HOROWITZ: What
I do to another,
I do to myself ultimately.
You know, there are people
who look at me and think, wow,
I don't know about
everything this guy is into,
because my search
gets really far out.
But it's always
done with the ethic
that what I do
returns to me, always.
>>REGINA: And meanwhile, you
keep pumping out the articles
for The Medium, right?
>>HOROWITZ: Working on it.
>>REGINA: Right.
Anything else you want to
say before we say goodbye?
>>HOROWITZ: I just want to
say, I know the difficulties
that people are going through.
I understand
economically and socially
what people are passing through.
And I know it's hard.
But you have tools in your
belt that you might not always
be aware of, that
you might not have
been raised to be aware of.
And mind and will
and desire can help
you navigate this life in
ways that you might never
have considered possible
>>REGINA: Mitch,
thank you so much.
>>HOROWITZ: Pleasure.
>>REGINA: I just adore
our conversations.
>>HOROWITZ: Likewise.
Thank you very much.
>>REGINA: OK.
I very much look forward
to our next conversation.
Sounds like it's going to be
about quite a number of things.
Meanwhile, you can
go to Mitch's site
at mitchhorowitz.com to find a
treasure trove of experience.
You can also go into
the Gaia archives
and watch my previous
interviews with Mitch.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]